\section{INTRODUCTION}
\label{sec:introduction}

Modeling is the activity of formulating an abstract description of a
system, for example to understand the system before it is implemented.
Modeling includes activities such as requirements capture in the
initial phases and design of higher-level architectural decisions in
later stages. Modeling has been studied by various communities, of
which at least two can be identified: the model-based engineering
community and the formal methods community. The {\em model-based
  engineering} community has suggested modeling languages such as UML
\cite{uml} and SysML \cite{sysml}, a variant of UML.  These languages
typically come equipped with graphical notations (concrete syntax).
Both UML and SysML have been designed by the OMG (Object Management
Group) technology standards consortium. SysML is meant for systems
development more broadly considered, including physical systems as
well as software systems, in contrast to UML, which is mainly meant
for software development. The graphical notations have received a high
degree of popularity in industry due to their two dimensional format,
also sometimes referred to popularly as {\em boxology}: boxes and
arrows. However, drawbacks of these languages include lack of precise
semantics, lack of analysis capabilities, tedious GUI operations in
tools supporting the graphical notations, requiring lots of visual
real estate even for simple models, as well as large volumes of
technologies. Learning UML and SysML is not just learning very large
languages, it is also learning a large set of additional tools needed
to work with models. We formulate the hypothesis that some of these
drawbacks in part are due to the lack of a simple textual notation, at
a size comparable to a programming language notation. As evidence of
this hypothesis, one may observe, that software developers mostly
prefer to program in textual languages.

From an even earlier point in time, since the 1960s, the {\em formal
  methods} community, part of the computer science community, and
closely connected to the programming language community, has proposed
numerous formally founded specification languages with textual
notations. Several of these are based on predicate logic and set
theory. These languages are, compared to UML and SysML, concise,
small, well defined in the form of semantics, and in recent time well
supported with analysis capabilities. The obvious observation is that
it might be fruitful to study the interaction between the two classes
of languages. Consider furthermore that programming languages are
gaining in abstraction, such as for example combining object-oriented
and functional programming. An example is Scala, which has many
commonalities with very early formal specification languages, such as
for example VDM \cite{vdm78}, and specifically its object-oriented
variant VDM$^{++}$ \cite{vdmplusplus05}.  The study should therefore
include the interaction between languages with graphical notations,
and languages with textual notations, such as formal methods modeling
languages, and programming languages

We report on an effort to develop a textual notation for SysML. For
this purpose we have developed a language named K (Kernel language)
with a textual notation inspired by notations used in the formal
methods community.  K corresponds to SysMLâ€™s class diagrams plus
constraints. It is our plan to map other SysML language concepts into
this kernel, rather than extending the K language to incorporate the
rest of SysML. K supports object-oriented concepts such as classes,
multiple inheritance, and object instances. The contents of classes
can be typed values, including functions, and constraints over these
expressed in higher-order predicate logic.  K also contains
programming constructs such as variables/properties, assignment
statements, and looping constructs, and can as such be seen as a
wide-spectrum modeling and programming language.  The K language
provides an alternative to modeling with the mouse in tools that
typically support SysML: namely writing textual models in the K
notation directly, just like one normally writes programs. K can
furthermore be seen as a vehicle for giving semantics to SysML,
providing analysis capabilities. It is our hypothesis, that modeling
can be seen as programming in a language where some parts of the model
(program) at any point in time are executable, and some maybe are not
(yet). Supporting this hypothesis is the large number of language
constructs shared by modeling and programming languages.

The idea of merging modeling and programming in one language has been
suggested before, as will be discussed in the related work section.
Although K is not much different from previously suggested formalisms,
our contribution is the creation of \Klang{} specifically in support
of a SysML model engineering tool set under development, to be used by
designers of the proposed 2022 mission to Jupiter's moon Europa, also
referred to as the Europa Clipper mission concept
\cite{europa-clipper}.  The resulting tool set will support graphical
SysML modeling using MagicDraw \cite{magicdraw}, as well as
browser-based model viewing and editing, including of textual K
models. A first-order subset of K is furthermore translated to the
input language of the SMT-LIB standard, and currently processed with
the Z3 SMT solver for proving satisfiability of class definitions (are
the constraints consistent?), and model finding (find variable
assignments satisfying constraints, for example used in task
scheduling).  The contribution here is the handling of (multiple)
class inheritance, which is typically not supported by similar
languages translated to SMT-LIB, as well as the allowance of recursive
class definitions. Multiple inheritance is a crucial part of SysML,
and therefore of K.

The paper is organized as follows. Section \ref{sec:k-syntax}
introduces a subset of the K language through an example, which is
similar to examples typically used to illustrate such formal
specification languages. Section \ref{sec:k2smt} outlines the
translation from K to the SMT-LIB input language for the purpose of
analysis of K models. This section is based on a different example
illustrating how K is actually currently used at JPL. Section
\ref{sec:usage} explains the integration of K within the SysML
development framework, as well as the usage of this. Section
\ref{sec:related-work} discusses related work, and finally Section
\ref{sec:conclusion} concludes the paper. 
